>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, DECEMBER 12: A
PACT TO CURB GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS WARMING THE PLANET IS
ADOPTED AT THE PARIS CLIMATE
CHANGE CONFERENCE; DENMARK LEADS
THE WAY TOWARD ENERGY
INDEPENDENCE WITH WIND POWER;
AND A CONVERSATION WITH A TOP
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL
ABOUT THE FIGHT AGAINST
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM AND
ISIS.
>> THEY DECIDED TO CROWDSOURCE
TERRORISM.
WHAT THEY DID IS, THEY BOMBARDED
THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS OF
PROPAGANDA MESSAGES ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
NEGOTIATORS FROM NEARLY EVERY
COUNTRY IN THE WORLD UNANIMOUSLY
AGREED TO A LANDMARK AGREEMENT
TODAY TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE,
PLEDGING TO REDUCE THEIR
EMISSIONS FROM BURNING FOSSIL
FUELS THAT CAUSE GLOBAL WARMING.
IT'S THE FIRST-EVER CLIMATE PACT
TO COMMIT ALL COUNTRIES--
INDUSTRIALIZED ONES LIKE THE
UNITED STATES AND DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES LIKE CHINA AND INDIA--
TO TAKE ACTION.
DELEGATES FROM 196 COUNTRIES
CHEERED AS THE GAVEL CAME DOWN
TO END THE TWO-WEEK CONFERENCE.
NO DELEGATION OBJECTED TO THE
31-PAGE FINAL AGREEMENT, WHICH
IS SET TO TAKE EFFECT IN 2020.
THE "PARIS AGREEMENT" AIMS TO
LIMIT THE RISE IN GLOBAL
TEMPERATURES TO TWO DEGREES
CELSIUS, OR 3.5 DEGREES
FAHRENHEIT, OVER HISTORIC
AVERAGES.
TO ACHIEVE THAT, THE AGREEMENT
CALLS ON NATIONS TO LIMIT THEIR
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS TO
AMOUNTS THE EARTH CAN ABSORB
NATURALLY BY THE SECOND HALF OF
THIS CENTURY.
AND IT REQUIRES COUNTRIES TO
UPDATE THEIR TARGETS FOR
REDUCING EMISSIONS BY BURNING
LESS OIL, COAL AND GAS EVERY
FIVE YEARS.
EARLIER THIS EVENING, FROM THE
WHITE HOUSE, PRESIDENT OBAMA
SAID THE DEAL IS A TURNING
POINT THAT PROVIDES THE
ARCHITECTURE TO SAVE PLANET THE
FROM THE WORST CONSEQUENCES OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> NO NATION, NOT EVEN ONE AS
POWERFUL AS OURS, CAN SOLVE THIS
CHALLENGE ALONE.
AND NO COUNTRY, NO MATTER HOW
SMALL, CAN SIT ON THE SIDELINES.
EVEN IF ALL THE INITIAL TARGETS
SET IN PARIS ARE MET, WE'LL ONLY
BE PART OF THE WAY THERE WHEN IT
COMES TO REDUCING CARBON FROM
THE ATMOSPHERE, SO WE CANNOT BE
COMPLACENT.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
FROM PARIS TO DISCUSS THE DEAL
IS "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTER MATT DALTON.
SO, THE OVERALL PICTURE, THE
PEOPLE YOU TALKED TO TODAY AFTER
THE GAVEL WENT DOWN, HOW ARE
THEY FEELING ABOUT THIS DEAL?
>> Reporter: THEY'RE FEELING
REALLY GOOD.
SCIENTISTS, ENVIRONMENTAL
GROUPS, GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS,
THEY'RE ALL PLEASANTLY SURPRISED
ABOUT HOW AMBITIOUS THE
AGREEMENT TURNED OUT TO BE.
THERE WAS REALLY NOT MUCH
WATERING DOWN AT THE END OF THE
NEGOTIATIONS.
IN FACT, IN SOME WAYS, THE
AGREEMENT MIGHT HAVE GOTTEN MORE
RIGOROUS.
SO, EVERYBODY IS REALLY PLEASED.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST WEEK,
WHEN WE SPOKE, WE SAID ONE OF
THE MAJOR HURDLES WAS THE
PAYMENT SCHEME.
WHAT ARE THE RICH COUNTRIES, THE
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES RESPONSIBLE
FOR?
WHAT ARE THE DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES LIKE INDIA AND CHINA
RESPONSIBLE FOR?
AND YOU SAID AT THE TIME THERE
WERE LOTS OF BRACKETS, THINGS TO
BE DETERMINED.
WHAT HAPPENED WITH THAT?
>> Reporter: THIS IS ONE AREA
WHERE I THINK THERE WAS A LITTLE
BIT OF WATERING DOWN.
THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES HAVE
AVOIDED ANY KIND OF LEGAL
REQUIREMENT TO PAY THIS MONEY TO
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT WAS A
RED LINE FOR THE U.S. IN
PARTICULAR BECAUSE THEY DON'T
WANT TO HAVE TO BRING THIS
AGREEMENT TO BE RATIFIED BY THE
U.S. SENATE, WHERE REPUBLICANS
WOULD ALMOST CERTAINLY BLOCK IT.
SO, ANY KIND OF LEGAL OBLIGATION
THAT WOULD INVOLVE A
CONGRESSIONAL APPROPRIATION TO
FUND THESE KINDS OF SCHEMES WAS
PUSHED ASIDE, LARGELY AT THE
REQUEST OF THE U.S. AND A FEW
OTHER DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.
THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES ESCAPED
ANY KIND OF REQUIREMENT TO FUND
ANY OF THE POOREST NATIONS ON
THEIR OWN.
THERE WAS SOME TALK-- THE
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES REALLY WANT
THIS-- TO HAVE A COUNTRY LIKE
CHINA, WHICH IS A WEALTHY,
RELATIVELY WEALTHY DEVELOPING
NATION, PROVIDE MONEY AND
PROVIDE MONEY AS A LEGAL
REQUIREMENT UNDER THIS
AGREEMENT.
AND THAT WAS-- THAT WAS PUSHED
ASIDE, AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, THERE
ARE SOME SQUISHY AREAS HERE WHEN
YOU LOOK THROUGH THE 31 PAGES.
IT SAYS THAT THEY WANT TO REACH
A CARBON PEAK AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE, NOT ANY SPECIFIC DATE.
AND THEN THERE ARE OTHER CLAUSES
THAT SAY SOME TIME IN THE SECOND
HALF OF THE CENTURY.
AGAIN, NO SPECIFIC DATES.
>> Reporter: THAT'S A PRODUCT OF
WHAT COULD BE CONSIDERED THE
FUNDAMENTAL WEAKNESS OF THIS
AGREEMENT, WHICH IS THAT THE
ACTUAL EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS ARE
NOT PRESCRIBED BY THE TREATY OR
THE AGREEMENT ITSELF.
THE EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS ARE SET
VOLUNTARILY BY INDIVIDUAL
GOVERNMENTS, ACCORDING TO THEIR
OWN PREFERENCES.
SO, THIS IS A PROBLEM.
IT MEANS THAT IT'S DIFFICULT TO
KIND OF PRESCRIBE A SPECIFIC
TIME WHEN EMISSIONS MIGHT PEAK,
WHEN THE ECONOMY WOULD BECOME
DECARBONIZED.
SO, IT'S LARGELY A RESULT, TO
SOME EXTENT, ANYWAY, A RESULT OF
THE PROBLEMS THAT THE U.S. HAS
GETTING THIS AGREEMENT THROUGH
CONGRESS, BECAUSE ANY KIND OF
INTERNATIONALLY AGREED EMISSIONS
REDUCTION PLAN WOULD MOST
CERTAINLY HAVE TO BE APPROVED BY
THE U.S. SENATE, WHERE IT WOULD
BE DEFEATED.
>> Sreenivasan: IT ALSO SEEMS
THERE WAS TENSION BETWEEN THE
SUPPLY SIDE AND THE DEMAND SIDE,
WHERE THE TREATY SEEMS TO TALK
A LOT ABOUT OUR CONSUMPTION.
THERE SEEMS TO BE A BIG COUNTER-
FORCE BY FOSSIL FUEL-PRODUCING
NATIONS.
>> Reporter: THE FOSSIL FUEL
PRODUCERS, SUCH AS SAUDI ARABIA,
WERE ONE OF THE BIG OPPONENTS OF
SOMETHING CALLED
DECARBONIZATION, WHICH IS HAVING
A SPECIFIC MENTION THAT THE
ECONOMY WILL BE BASICALLY
FOSSIL FUEL-FREE BY THE END OF
THE CENTURY.
OBVIOUSLY, A COUNTRY LIKE SAUDI
ARABIA, ONE OF THE WORLD'S
LARGEST OIL PRODUCERS, IS GOING
TO BE WEARY ABOUT SIGNING ON TO
SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
BUT SAUDI ARABIA DID SIGN ON TO
THIS AGREEMENT, WHICH WILL
CERTAINLY LOWER THE WORLD'S
CONSUMPTION OF OIL BEYOND WHAT
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MATT DALTON OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," JOINING US FROM THE
PARIS CLIMATE TALKS.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AS THE U.N.
CLIMATE CHANGE SUMMIT COMES TO A
CLOSE, ONE EUROPEAN NATION
STANDS OUT FOR THE STRIDES IT
HAS TAKEN TO CONVERT FROM FOSSIL
FUELS TO RENEWABLE ENERGY
SOURCES LIKE WIND AND SOLAR
POWER.
THAT COUNTRY IS DENMARK, WHICH
ASPIRES OVER THE NEXT 35 YEARS
TO BECOME THE FIRST NATION ON
EARTH TO RUN COMPLETELY ON CLEAN
ENERGY, INCLUDING FOR
TRANSPORTATION.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE BEGIN ON SAMSO ISLAND JUST
WEST OF COPENHAGEN TO SEE HOW
THAT PLAN IS TAKING EFFECT.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
LISA DESAI REPORTS.
>> Reporter: THE ISLAND OF SAMSO
LIES NINE MILES OFF DENMARK'S
MAINLAND.
IT'S MOSTLY A FARMING COMMUNITY
AND HOME TO 4,000 RESIDENTS WHO
ARE PART OF A CUTTING EDGE
EXPERIMENT.
>> GOOD MORNING.
>> Reporter: SOREN HERMANSEN IS
THE MAN MOST RESPONSIBLE FOR
PUTTING SAMSO ON THE MAP AS THE
WORLD'S FIRST ISLAND POWERED
100% BY RENEWABLE ENERGY.
THE TRANSFORMATION BEGAN IN THE
LATE 1990s.
>> THE QUESTION WOULD ALWAYS BE,
DOES IT COST MORE THAN WHAT WE
HAVE TODAY?
OR HOW DO FINANCE IT?
OR IS IT TECHNICALLY DIFFICULT?
WILL IT CHANGE MY DAILY ROUTINES
AND STUFF LIKE THAT?
OKAY, SO, ALL THIS SMART HOUSE
THING HERE IS CONTROLLED BY A
COMPUTER.
>> Reporter: AS DIRECTOR OF THE
SAMSO ENERGY ACADEMY, HERMANSEN
HOSTS VISITORS FROM AROUND THE
WORLD, EXPLAINING HOW SAMSO WENT
FROM BEING ENTIRELY DEPENDENT ON
IMPORTED OIL AND COAL FOR ITS
ELECTRICITY TO RUNNING FULLY ON
WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY.
>> IT'S PRODUCING ABOUT 6,000
KILOWATT HOURS PER YEAR, WHICH
IS THE SAME AS WE CONSUME IN
TOTAL PER YEAR.
>> Reporter: THE MAIN SOURCE OF
POWER ON THE ISLAND IS 21 WIND
TURBINES, 11 ON SHORE AND TEN
OFFSHORE.
>> THE ELECTRICITY IS ALL
PRODUCED FROM WIND TURBINES
TODAY, WHICH WAS A GREAT BIG
EFFORT BECAUSE SOME OF THE
ISLANDERS, THEY KIND OF HAD THIS
IMAGE THAT, WOW, MAYBE THE
ISLAND WILL FLIP OVER BECAUSE
THEY'RE SO BIG.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: OVERALL, THE ISLAND
PRODUCES MORE ENERGY THAN IT
CONSUMES AND TRANSMITS THE
EXCESS BY CABLE TO MAINLAND
DENMARK.
SAMSO USES THE PROFIT IT MAKES
FROM SELLING THE EXCESS-- ABOUT
$3 MILLION LAST YEAR-- TO
IMPROVE ITS ENERGY
INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> SOME OF THE CRITICS SAID A
WIND TURBINE WOULD NEVER PAY ITS
OWN COST IN IT'S LIFETIME.
THAT'S A MYTH.
>> Reporter: BUT MOST OF THE
ISLAND'S HOME HEATING COMES FROM
A DIFFERENT RENEWABLE SOURCE:
BIOMASS, OR PLANT-BASED ENERGY.
AND THE FUEL IS LOCALLY-GROWN
STRAW.
>> WE HAVE FOUR DISTRICT HEATING
PLANTS, AND THEY SERVE ABOUT
75% OF ALL HEATING DEMANDS.
>> Reporter: HERMANSEN TOOK ME
TO ONE OF THOSE HEATING
FACILITIES.
>> WE BURN STRAW IN, LIKE, A BIG
POT AND THEN COOK WATER AND SEND
IT AROUND TO PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: TRANSFORMING SAMSO
HAS COST $80 MILLION OVER THE
PAST DECADE-AND-A-HALF, A MIX OF
PRIVATE INVESTMENT AND
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES.
HERMANSEN SAYS THE BIGGEST
CHALLENGE WASN'T ECONOMIC OR
TECHNICAL; IT WAS SOCIAL.
>> THE FARMING COMMUNITY HAD TO
BE CONVINCED THEY SHOULD SHARE
THEIR LAND WITH WIND TURBINES
AND OTHER OWNERS, AND THEY COULD
EITEHR BE THEIR OWN OWNER OR
THEY COULD BE COOPERATIVE OWNERS
WITH OTHER PEOPLE.
AND FOR THE HOUSE OWNERS, IF YOU
CHANGE YOUR HEATING SYSTEM TO
USE DISTRICT HEATING OR BIOMASS
OR SOLAR PANELS, THEN IT WILL BE
CHEAPER AND BETTER THAN THE
TRADITIONAL OIL BOILER YOU HAD
IN THE HOUSE BEFORE.
I NEEDED TO SHOW THEM THE MONEY,
IN A WAY.
>> Reporter: SHOW THE MONEY TO
SAMSO RESIDENTS LIKE
ELECTRICIAN BRIAN KJAER, WHO
DECIDED TO PLACE A WIND TURBINE
IN HIS OWN BACKYARD.
THIS IS YOUR OWN PERSONAL
TURBINE.
>> YES, IT IS.
>> Reporter: NOT A LOT OF PEOPLE
CAN SAY THEY HAVE ONE IN THEIR
BACKYARD.
KJAER FIGURES THE WIND TURBINE
SAVES HIS FAMILY $2,000 TO
$3,000 A YEAR ON HIS ELECTRIC
BILL.
>> EVERYBODY IS LOOKING HERE AND
SAYS, "YOU'RE SO WAY AHEAD IN
OUR CHALLENGE TO CUT BACK ON
FOSSIL FUELS."
AND FOR US, IT'S OUR EVERYDAY
LIFE, AND WE FEEL IT'S NATURAL.
>> Reporter: DOWN THE ROAD,
FARMER JORGEN TRANBERG IS ALSO
ENERGY SELF-SUFFICIENT.
>> I HAVE FULL UP ALL MY GOOD
ROOFS WITH SOLAR PANELS, AND
THIS HOUSE IS FULL UP WITH
STRAW.
>> Reporter: HE OWNS SOLAR
PANELS, PART OF AN OFFSHORE WIND
TURBINE, AND ANOTHER TURBINE
THAT'S RIGHT ON HIS PROPERTY.
>> THE SOLAR PANELS, THEY PAY
BACK IN EIGHT YEARS, AND SO WHY
NOT TRY?
>> Reporter: INSTEAD OF JUST
TALK, YOU DID ACTION?
>> YES, AND I EARNED MONEY ON
IT.
>> Reporter: HE EARNS MONEY BY
SELLING THE POWER HE DOESN'T USE
BACK TO THE SAMSO UTILITIES.
SO, WHAT ARE WE ABOUT TO DO?
>> WELL, WE INTEND TO CLIMB THE
TURBINE.
>> Reporter: WE'LL WARM UP ONCE
WE START CLIMBING.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Reporter: SHOULD I GO IN?
>> YEAH, GO IN.
>> Reporter: BEFORE STARTING UP,
I PUT ON A SAFETY SUIT AND
GLOVES.
IT'S A 150-FOOT CLIMB TO THE
TOP.
>> SO, ONE MORE STEP.
CAN YOU REACH UP HERE?
>> Reporter: YEAH.
>> THAT'S BETTER.
SO, YOU CAN LIFT YOURSELF UP?
>> Reporter: WITH A PUSH OF A
BUTTON, HERMANSEN OPENS THE DOOR
TO THE NACELLE, WHICH HOUSES THE
GEARBOX AND GENERATOR.
>> YOU CAN STEP UP HERE AND YOU
CAN HAVE THE VIEW.
ALL RIGHT?
>> Reporter: WHOA!
THIS IS REALLY, REALLY
SOMETHING.
>> IT'S SIMILAR TO A
3,000-HORSEPOWER ENGINE.
SO, IT'S A BIG ENGINE.
>> Reporter: SAMSO HAS BECOME A
SYMBOL OF WHAT DENMARK WANTS FOR
ALL OF ITS 5.5 MILLION PEOPLE.
IT'S THE FIRST COUNTRY TO BUILD
MASSIVE OFFSHORE WIND PARKS AND
HAS AN AMBITIOUS PLAN TO RUN
100% ON RENEWABLE ENERGY BY
2050-- NO OIL, COAL OR GAS FOR
ELECTRICITY, HEAT OR EVEN
TRANSPORTATION.
THE PLAN WAS SET IN MOTION IN
DENMARK'S CAPITAL, COPENHAGEN,
40 YEARS AGO-- NOT BECAUSE OF
GLOBAL WARMING, BUT BECAUSE OF
THE 1973 ARAB OIL EMBARGO.
WITH 99% OF ITS ENERGY THEN
COMING FROM THE MIDDLE EAST,
DENMARK DECIDED TO PURSUE ENERGY
INDEPENDENCE.
ITS THOUSANDS OF MILES OF
COASTLINE ARE ESPECIALLY
SUITABLE FOR HARNESSING WIND
POWER.
BUT ONE DRAWBACK IS, THE SUPPLY
IS NOT CONSISTENT.
>> YOU'VE ARRIVED ON A DAY WHERE
THERE IS NO WIND IN DENMARK.
>> Reporter: TORBEN GLAR NIELSEN
IS EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF
ENERGINET, A GOVERNMENT-OWNED
COMPANY RESPONSIBLE FOR
DENMARK'S ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE.
AT THE HEART OF THE SYSTEM IS AN
INTERCONNECTED ELECTRICAL GRID,
A SORT OF ENERGY EXCHANGE THAT
LINKS DENMARK TO ITS NEIGHBORS
SWEDEN AND NORWAY TO THE NORTH
AND GERMANY TO THE SOUTH.
>> WE HAVE INTERCONNECTORS TO
OTHER COUNTRIES.
WHEN THIS IS NO WIND, FOR
EXAMPLE, WE CAN IMPORT; AND WHEN
THERE IS A LOT OF WIND, WE CAN
EXPORT.
>> Reporter: ENERGINET IS IN
NEGOTIATIONS TO EXTEND THE GRID
TO INCLUDE THE NETHERLANDS AND
THE U.K., MAKING THE MARKET FOR
RENEWABLE ENERGY MORE RELIABLE
AND COMPETITIVE.
>> PEOPLE, THEY CAN BUY THEIR
ELECTRICITY WHERE IT'S CHEAPEST,
SO THAT'S VERY GOOD FOR THE
CONSUMERS.
>> Reporter: BUT NOT SO GOOD FOR
TRADITIONAL POWER PLANTS.
WHILE ON AVERAGE DENMARK
PRODUCES 40% OF ITS ELECTRICITY
FROM WIND, THERE ARE TIMES WHEN
IT PRODUCES MORE THAN 100%, AND
THAT MAKES THE PRICE OF
ELECTRICITY SO CHEAP, COAL AND
GAS FIRED PLANTS CAN'T COMPETE.
ONE DAY IN SEPTEMBER, POWER
PLANTS ACROSS THE WHOLE COUNTRY
SHUT DOWN FOR 24 HOURS.
>> WHAT THEY ARE DOING, A LOT
THEM, IS THAT THEY VERY EARLY
TOOK THE STEP AND SAID, "OKAY,
WE HAVE TO HAVE TO BE PART OF
THIS INSTEAD OF AGAINST THIS."
SO, TODAY, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
DANISH COMPANY DONG, THEY ARE
BUILDING OFFSHORE WIND PARKS.
INSTEAD OF JUST SAYING, "WE WANT
TO STICK TO THE COAL-FIRED POWER
PLANTS," THEY HAVE GONE INTO THE
NEW BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: BEYOND DEVELOPING
RENEWABLE ENERGY, DENMARK IS
PUSHING CONSERVATION, TOO.
TO DISCOURAGE GASOLINE
CONSUMPTION, DENMARK'S TAX ON
NEW CARS IS AMONG THE HIGHEST IN
THE WORLD: 180%.
THAT ENCOURAGES DANES TO SPEND
MORE TIME ON TWO WHEELS.
IN FACT, HERE IN COPENHAGEN,
ONE-THIRD OF ALL COMMUTES TO
WORK AND SCHOOL ARE DONE ON
BIKES.
WHILE ELECTRIC CARS ARE NOT AS
POPULAR HERE AS IN OTHER
COUNTRIES, LIKE NORWAY, THE
NETHERLANDS, GERMANY OR THE
U.S., DENMARK OFFERS A BIG
FINANCIAL INCENTIVE TO BUY
ELECTRIC: WAIVING THAT 180% NEW
CAR TAX.
ENGINEERS MADS AND ANN LYKKE OWN
TWO.
>> IT'S BETTER TECHNOLOGY.
IT'S MUCH MORE FUN, IT'S QUIET,
IT'S CLEANER.
>> AND YOU NEVER LOSE A RACE FOR
GREEN LIGHTS.
>> NO.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: THEIR APPLIANCES
ARE ALL RATED A-PLUS.
LIKE A LOT OF THEIR NEIGHBORS,
THE LYKKES HAVE A WASHING
MACHINE, DISHWASHER, OVEN,
REFRIGERATOR AND FREEZER WITH
MAXIMUM ENERGY EFFICIENCY.
THEIR LAMPS USE L.E.D. BULBS,
WHICH USE LESS ENERGY THAN
TYPICAL INCANDESCENT OR
FLUORESCENT BULBS.
>> AND IT'S SO EFFICIENT THAT IT
DOESN'T GET WARM.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE THEIR HOUSE
HAS SOLAR PANELS, TOO, THE
FAMILY IS VERY CONSCIOUS OF ITS
ENERGY CONSUMPTION, TRACKING IT
ALL ON THEIR COMPUTER.
THAT SPIKE?
WHEN THE COFFEE MAKER WENT ON IN
THE MORNING.
WHILE ALL OF THIS COST THEM MORE
UP FRONT, THE LYKKES SAY IT
SAVES THEM MONEY IN THE LONG
RUN, AND IT'S THE RIGHT THING TO
DO.
>> I THINK IT'S ONLY NATURAL
THAT YOU WANT TO LEAVE A BETTER
COUNTRY FOR YOUR KIDS.
WE ALSO WANT TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: DENMARK'S VISION OF
THE FUTURE INCLUDES "SMART
HOMES" WITH COMPUTERS THAT RUN
APPLIANCES WHEN ENERGY DEMAND IS
LOWEST AND CHEAPEST; AND
EXTENDING THE SMART POWER GRID
THROUGHOUT EUROPE, FROM DENMARK
TO SPAIN, TO DISTRIBUTE POWER
WHERE IT'S REALLY NEEDED ON ANY
GIVEN DAY.
BACK ON SAMSO ISLAND, SOREN
HERMANSEN IS LOOKING AHEAD.
>> WE SHOULD GO FURTHER BECAUSE
WE CAN.
WE SHOULD DEVELOP THE
TECHNOLOGIES BECAUSE IT'S
NECESSARY AND WE HAVE THE
POSSIBILITIES, AND WE SHOULD DO
SCIENCE AND RESEARCH ALSO TO BE
ON THE NEXT LEVEL OF DEVELOPMENT
TO HELP OUT THE REST OF THE
WORLD IN THIS TRANSITION TO
BETTER THE CLIMATE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
HOW DENMARK IS TACKLING THE
CHALLENGE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
PRODUCTION, WATCH OUR EARLIER
REPORT FROM DENMARK THROUGH OUR
PUBLIC MEDIA COLLABORATION WITH
"INSIDE ENERGY."
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
INVESTIGATORS INTO THE
DECEMBER 2 TERRORIST MASS
SHOOTING IN SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA, SEARCHED A LAKE A
FEW MILES FROM THE SITE FOR A
THIRD DAY TODAY.
FOLLOWING A TIP, THEY ARE
LOOKING FOR ANY BELONGINGS THE
HUSBAND-AND-WIFE ATTACKERS MAY
HAVE DUMPED THERE BEFORE LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS KILLED THEM
IN A SHOOTOUT.
ONE OFFICIAL AT THE HELM OF THE
U.S GOVERNMENT'S FIGHT AGAINST
TERRORISM IS THE ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR NATIONAL
SECURITY, JOHN CARLIN.
CARLIN OVERSEES 75 CRIMINAL
CASES THAT HAVE BEEN BROUGHT IN
THE PAST 18 MONTHS AGAINST
ALLEGED SUPPORTERS OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA,
KNOWN AS ISIS OR ISIL.
THE MAJORITY ALLEGEDLY TRIED TO
TRAVEL ABROAD AND A QUARTER ARE
ACCUSED OF PLOTS ON U.S. SOIL.
IN AN INTERVIEW EARLIER THIS
WEEK, CARLIN LAID OUT THE THREAT
THAT ISIS REPRESENTS.
>> WE'RE FACING A NEW THREAT
WHEN IT COMES TO TERRORISM.
THE ISLAMIC STATE, WHAT THEY DID
IS THEY DECIDED TO CROWDSOURCE
TERRORISM.
AND THEY EXPLOITED U.S.
TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES-- TWITTER,
FACEBOOK, GOOGLE, OTHERS THAT DO
SO MUCH GOOD-- BUT THEY
EXPLOITED THEM FOR THEIR
TERRORIST AIMS.
WHAT THEY DID IS THEY BOMBARDED
THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS OF
PROPAGANDA MESSAGES ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
THEN, WHEN THEY HAD SOMEONE ON
THE HOOK THROUGH SOCIAL MEDIA,
WHAT THEY WOULD DO IS OFTEN TAKE
THEM INTO A PRIVATE, ENCRYPTED
DIRECT MESSAGING FORUM, AND YOU
WOULD HAVE A TERRORIST OVERSEAS
TALKING TO A KID HERE IN THE
UNITED STATES AND FURTHER WALK
THEM DOWN THAT PATH OF
RADICAL... RADICALIZATION.
AND WHILE THEIR SUCCESS RATE IS
VERY SMALL, ALL IT TAKES IS A
RELATIVELY SMALL NUMBER TO POSE
A BIG PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT FIGHTING AN IDEA.
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT FIGHTING AN
IDEA WITH ALL THE MODERN TOOLS
AND TECHNOLOGIES THAT EXIST
TODAY TO SPREAD IDEAS.
HOW DO YOU STOP SOMEONE FROM
PROSELYTIZING ACROSS TWITTER?
>> WE VERY MUCH NEED THE SAME
FOLKS WHO HAD THE INNOVATIVE
IDEA TO CREATE THESE PRODUCTS,
TO FOCUS ON THE SOLUTION.
THEY DON'T WANT THEIR BUSINESSES
USED BY TERRORISM.
SO, WE NEED TO WORK IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THEM TO KEEP
TERRORISTS OVERSEAS FROM
TARGETING OUR KIDS.
WE'VE BROUGHT OVER 75 CRIMINAL
CASES AGAINST TERRORISTS IN THE
U.S. SYSTEM.
IN THE BEGINNING, THEY USED TO
MOSTLY BE FOREIGN TERRORIST
FIGHTERS, THOSE WHO WANT TO GO
JOIN THIS GROUP OVERSEAS.
WE NEED TO BE CONCERNED, ONCE
THOSE GUYS GET THAT TRAINING
OVERSEAS, THAT THEY DON'T COME
BACK AND USE IT TO COMMIT
TERRORIST ATTACKS INSIDE THE
UNITED STATES OR IN WESTERN
EUROPE.
ISIL STARTED SAYING, "NO
PASSPORT REQUIRED, NO TRAVEL
REQUIRED; WE CALL ON YOU TO
COMMIT ATTACKS, TERRORIST
ATTACKS WHERE YOU LIVE, KILL
INNOCENTS AROUND WHERE YOU
LIVE."
AND WE'VE SEEN PEOPLE ANSWER
THAT CALL IN AUSTRALIA, IN
CANADA, IN FRANCE, IN BELGIUM.
HERE IN AMERICA, WE'RE NOT
SEEING ANY PARTICULAR ETHNIC
GROUP OR GEOGRAPHIC GROUP ANSWER
THE CALL.
INSTEAD, THE TREND IS, ALMOST
EVERY CASE INVOLVED SOCIAL
MEDIA.
OVER HALF THESE CASES INVOLVE
INDIVIDUALS 25 OR YOUNGER, AND,
MOST TROUBLING, A THIRD INVOLVE
KIDS THAT ARE 21 OR UNDER.
WE'VE NEVER SEEN THAT PROBLEM
HERE BEFORE WHEN IT COMES TO
TERRORIST THREATS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, HOW DO YOU
STOP THAT?
WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
SOMEONE WHO'S UNDER 25, THEY
MIGHT BE LISTENING TO TWITTER
AND INSTAGRAM A LOT MORE THAN
THEIR PARENTS.
>> THAT'S A VERY GOOD POINT, AND
THESE CORPORATIONS THAT PROVIDE
THESE SERVICES, AND THEIR
ADVERTISERS, ARE REALLY GOOD AT
FIGURING OUT WHO'S LISTENING TO
WHAT AND HOW TO CHANGE MINDS.
WE NEED THEIR HELP TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE TERRORISTS AREN'T OUT
THERE USING THEIR SERVICES TO
PINPOINT INDIVIDUALS, THE SAME
WAY WE'VE DONE CAMPAIGNS AGAINST
SEXUAL PREDATORS.
BECAUSE I THINK A LOT OF PARENTS
OUT THERE, YOU KNOW, THEY DON'T
NECESSARILY KNOW WHAT THEIR KID
IS UP TO WHEN THEY'RE DOWN IN
THE BASEMENT ONLINE, OR WHEN
THEY'RE WALKING AROUND USING
THEIR PHONES ON SOCIAL MEDIA.
AND IT USED TO BE THE ASSESSMENT
OF THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
THAT BEFORE SOMEONE WOULD BECOME
A TERRORIST, THEY WOULD NEED TO
MEET SOMEONE IN THE REAL WORLD,
FACE-TO-FACE, WHO WOULD WALK
THEM DOWN THAT PATH.
BUT THAT ASSESSMENT'S CHANGED,
ESPECIALLY WITH THIS GENERATION
THAT'S USED TO TRUSTING PEOPLE
ONLINE.
AND WE NEED TO ADJUST
ACCORDINGLY.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO YOU SEE
ENCRYPTION AS A PROBLEM,
ESPECIALLY WITH TELECOM
COMPANIES?
>> YOU HAVE THE TERRORIST
OVERSEAS.
ONCE THEY'RE IN DIRECT CONTACT,
THEY USE AMERICAN-MADE
TECHNOLOGY THAT'S PUSHED OUT FOR
FREE AND HAS MANY GOOD PURPOSES,
TO DIRECTLY COMMUNICATE.
AND WHAT I'LL FIND, FROM WHERE
WE SIT, IS WE'LL GET A WARRANT.
WE GO TO SERVE IT ON THE
COMPANY, AND THE COMPANY SAYS,
"YES, THIS IS LEGAL PROCESS, BUT
WE ARE TECHNICALLY UNABLE TO
EFFECTUATE THE COURT PROCESS.
WE CAN'T TELL YOU WHAT THEY'RE
SAYING.
WRITING TO EACH OTHER."
THAT'S A MAJOR PROBLEM FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT INTELLIGENCE,
BECAUSE THAT'S BEEN A
CRITICAL... THE ABILITY TO DO
THOSE INTERCEPTS HAS BEEN A
CRITICAL TOOL.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, IS THERE A
CONCERN THAT, IF YOU ASK A
COMPANY TO, SAY, DECRYPT ALL
CONVERSATIONS, YOU'RE ALSO
THREATENING MY RIGHT TO HAVE
PRIVATE SPEECH AND MY ABILITY TO
WHISPER A SECRET TO YOU?
>> SO, I THINK WHAT WE NEED TO
DO IS HAVE A BALANCE BETWEEN
PROTECTING OUR NATIONAL
SECURITY, BUT WHAT WE ARE
PROTECTING IS OUR WAY OF LIFE,
WHICH INCLUDES OUR CIVIL
LIBERTIES AND OUR PRIVACY.
AND WE CAN AND HAVE DONE BOTH.
SO, WHAT THEY'RE LOOKING FOR NOW
IN PARTNERSHIP IS SAYING, "LOOK,
WHAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR IS
SPECIFIC TARGETED ABILITY TO DO
AN INTERCEPT WHEN WE HAVE A
LAWFUL COURT ORDER.
AND WE'RE ASKING FOR A TECHNICAL
MEANS TO BE ABLE TO EFFECTUATE
THE COURT ORDER."
FOLKS IN GOVERNMENT DON'T NEED
TO HAVE THAT SOLUTION, WE JUST
NEED THE COMPANY TO BE ABLE TO
DO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: JOHN CARLIN,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW UNITED
NATIONS REPORT SAYS AT LEAST 848
AFGHAN CIVILIANS WERE KILLED OR
WOUNDED DURING THE TALIBAN'S TWO
WEEK SIEGE THIS SEPTEMBER ON THE
NORTHERN AFGHAN CITY OF KUNDUZ.
THAT PERIOD OF FIGHTING INCLUDED
THE MISTAKEN OCTOBER 3rd U.S.
AIRSTRIKE ON A HOSPITAL RUN BY
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS.
TODAY, THE GROUP SAID THE
AIRSTRIKE KILLED 42 PEOPLE,
INCLUDING 14 STAFF MEMBERS AND
24 PATIENTS.
AFGHAN AND INTERNATIONAL FORCES
ENDED THE TALIBAN OCCUPATION OF
KUNDUZ IN MID-OCTOBER.
WOMEN IN SAUDI ARABIA ARE GOING
TO THE POLLS FOR THE FIRST TIME.
ABOUT 130,000 SAUDI WOMEN ARE
REGISTERED TO VOTE IN TODAY'S
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
980 WOMEN ARE ALSO CANDIDATES.
THE 300 LOCAL COUNCILS ARE THE
ONLY OFFICES ELECTED BY POPULAR
VOTE IN THE SAUDI KINGDOM.
RESULTS ARE EXPECTED TOMORROW.
AUTHORITIES IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA SAY A FIRE AT A
MOSQUE WAS CAUSED BY ARSON.
THE FIRE AT THE ISLAMIC SOCIETY
OF COACHELLA VALLEY STARTED
AROUND NOON YESTERDAY AND WAS
CONTAINED WITHIN HALF AN HOUR.
NO ONE WAS HURT.
THE MOSQUE IS ABOUT 75 MILES
FROM SAN BERNARDINO, WHERE TWO
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS SHOT AND
KILLED 14 PEOPLE AT A HOLIDAY
PARTY ON DECEMBER 2.
OFFICIALS SAY THEY WILL
INVESTIGATE THE BLAZE AS A
POTENTIAL HATE CRIME.
THE F.B.I. IS TAKING PART IN THE
INVESTIGATION.
THE U.S. HAS REACHED ITS LOWEST
ABORTION RATE SINCE THE
GOVERNMENT BEGAN TRACKING LEGAL
ABORTIONS IN THE 1970s.
A REPORT ISSUED YESTERDAY BY THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION FOUND THERE WERE
13 ABORTIONS FOR EVERY THOUSAND
WOMEN IN 2012, THE LATEST YEAR
DATA IS AVAILABLE.
BETWEEN 1990 AND 2010, THE
ABORTION RATE FELL 35%.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE OVERALL
PREGNANCY RATE WENT DOWN 10%,
WITH TEEN PREGNANCIES DOWN BY
HALF.
COMING UP ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM:
ONE AMERICAN CITY AT THE CENTER
OF THE DEBATE OVER HOW TO TREAT
THE HOMELESS.
>> BEING HOMELESS IS NOT A CRIME
IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> WE'RE TRYING TO DEAL WITH THE
SITUATION IN THE MOST
HUMANITARIAN WAY THAT WE CAN.
>> Sreenivasan: TO SEE MORE FROM
MY CONVERSATION WITH ASSISTANT
U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL JOHN
CARLIN ABOUT SOME RECENT
HIGH-PROFILE HACKING CASES,
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.